[ADD] crm: add marketing attribution doc (#9566)
odoo/documentation: content/applications/sales/crm/track_leads/marketing_attribution.rst

=============================
Marketing attribution reports
=============================

Use the Odoo *CRM* app to compile a *marketing attribution report*, which analyzes the source of
leads in the CRM, and groups them in such a way as to calculate marketing's overall impact on lead
generation, attribution, won rate, and more.

Leads Analysis dashboard
========================

Begin by navigating to the :guilabel:`Leads Analysis` dashboard by going to :menuselection:`CRM app
--> Reporting --> Leads`.

.. tip::
   Alternatively, reports can also be run on the :menuselection:`CRM app --> Leads` dashboard or the
   :menuselection:`CRM app --> Sales --> My Pipeline` dashboard (in case the :guilabel:`Leads`
   dashboard is not available); both dashboards contain the necessary :guilabel:`Filters` and
   :guilabel:`Group By` criteria to run an attribution report.

.. seealso::
   - :doc:`Convert leads into opportunities <../acquire_leads/convert>`
   - :doc:`Create leads <../acquire_leads/email_manual>`

.. image:: marketing_attribution/reporting-tab-and-leads.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Open the CRM app and click on the Reporting tab at the top of the page, then click Leads.

> The :icon:`fa-area-chart` :guilabel:`(Graph)` view will be shown by default, with :guilabel:`Active

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :icon:`fa-area-chart` :guilabel:`(graph)` view is shown, by default, with :guilabel:`Active
```

or Inactive` and :guilabel:`Created on: YYYY` filters active in the :guilabel:`Search...` bar. The
graph visualization displays the number of leads generated, by month and by sales team, with each
sales team attributed to its own color per bar (month) shown.

> Switch the view to the :icon:`oi-view-list` :guilabel:`(List)` option, by clicking the respective

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Switch the view to the :icon:`oi-view-list` :guilabel:`(list)` option, by clicking the respective
```
It's my understanding that we are only meant to capitalize Kanban, when it comes to views... but a quick double-check with SALI about this may be best

icon located at the top-right of the dashboard.

.. image:: marketing_attribution/list-view-button.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Click the button with four horizontal lines on the top right of the Leads Analysis page.

Add UTM parameters
==================

*Urchin Tracking Modules (UTMs)* are snippets of text embedded in URLs that allow for data about
visitors to be tracked. This includes parameters relating to how a visitor reached the link, such as
the type of website visited and marketing campaign the visit came from.

Odoo can use these UTMs as parameters in the marketing attribution report to track the metrics and
performance of marketing campaigns.

Create UTMs
-----------

The :doc:`link tracker <../../../websites/website/reporting/link_tracker>` in Odoo can be used to
create and configure UTMs.

> UTMs can also be automatically generated by :doc:`Email Marketing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UTMs can also be automatically generated by the :doc:`Email Marketing
```

<../../../marketing/email_marketing>` and :doc:`Marketing Automation
<../../../marketing/marketing_automation>` apps.

> The UTM parameters used in a marketing attribution report are *Medium*, *Source*, and *Campaign* in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The UTM parameters used in a marketing attribution report are *Medium*, *Source*, and *Campaign*, in
```

descending order of coverage.

- *Medium* is the UTM with the widest coverage, such as social media.

> - *Source* is more narrow and covers parameters such as the specific social media platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Source* is more narrow, and covers parameters, such as the specific social media platform.
```

> - *Campaign* is the narrowest and can track specific marketing campaigns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Campaign* is the most narrow, and can track specific marketing campaigns.
```

Create reports
==============

> To start creating a report, click the :icon:`fa-caret-down` :guilabel:`(down caret)` to the right of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start creating a report, click the :icon:`fa-caret-down` :guilabel:`(down arrow)` to the right of
```
I know this hasn't been "set in stone" or anything, but I am always "in the camp" of making things as universally-understood as possible. Especially with highly technical jargon, such as 'caret' (arrow) or 'modal' (pop-up)...I just feel like the average reader wouldn't exactly know that term off-the-cuff. In other words, they may actually look for a 'carrot' icon (despite the spelling difference). All that said, I think it's more useful to the reader, and the doc, in general, by using the term "arrow" in lieu of "caret" for those reasonings. What you did was *technically* spot-on, 100% correct -- I'm just suggesting this difference to appease the otherwise not-as-tech-savvy reader.

> the search bar to see the list of filtering and grouping parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the :guilabel:`Search...` bar to see the list of filtering and grouping parameters.
```

:guilabel:`Filters`, located in the left column of the search options, can be used to keep only

> the results that fit the filter. For example, selecting the :guilabel:`Won` filter will only
> show won leads in the attribution report. :guilabel:`Group By`, found in the middle column, is
> used to organize the results into groups and can be used with or without filters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the results that fit the filter. For example, selecting the :guilabel:`Won` filter only
shows leads that have been won in the attribution report.

:guilabel:`Group By`, found in the middle column, is used to organize the results into groups, and can be
used with or without filters.
```

.. image:: marketing_attribution/search-results-multiple-options.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Select any number of filters and groups in the search options.

.. tip::

>     Setting multiple Group By options will create nested groups according to which is selected
>     first. For example, selecting :guilabel:`Medium` followed by :guilabel:`Source` and then
>     ::guilabel:`Campaign` in :guilabel:`Group By` will sort all results *first* by medium, *then* by
>     the specific sources in each medium, followed by the campaigns in each source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Setting multiple :guilabel:`Group By` options creates nested groups, according to which option is selected
    first. For example, selecting :guilabel:`Medium`, followed by :guilabel:`Source`, and then
    ::guilabel:`Campaign`, in :guilabel:`Group By` column, sorts all results *first* by medium, *then* by
    the specific sources in each medium, followed by the campaigns in each source.
```

>     This can be verified by looking at the direction of the carat in the group tile in
>     the search bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This can be verified by looking at the direction, and order, of the selections in the group tile that appears in
    the :guilabel:`Search...` bar.
```

    .. image:: marketing_attribution/group-by.png
       :align: center
       :alt: The text in the tile is `Country > City`, showing that city is a subgroup of country.

.. example::
    For a useful first report:

>     #. Select the :guilabel:`Active` filter to view only leads that are still marked as active.
>     #. Select :guilabel:`Source` followed by the :guilabel:`City` or :guilabel:`Country`
>        groups depending on which grouping is more relevant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #. From the :guilabel:`Filters` column, select the :guilabel:`Active` filter to view only leads that are still marked as active.
    #. From the :guilabel:`Group By` column, select (in this specific order) :guilabel:`Source`, followed by the :guilabel:`City` or :guilabel:`Country`, depending on which grouping is more relevant.
```

    .. image:: marketing_attribution/campaign-and-country-groups.png
       :align: center
       :alt: Each lead is now sorted by source, followed by city or country.

>     This report will contain all active leads grouped first by the source of the lead, then the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This report contains all active leads, grouped first by the source of the lead, then the
```

>     country or city each lead is from. This is useful to see the density of active opportunities

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    city or country each lead is from. This is useful to see the density of active opportunities
```
suggesting this minor reordering to fall in line with the sentence formatting above

    sorted by location.

>     With this data, marketing campaigns such as conferences or billboards can be targeted to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    With this data, marketing campaigns, such as conferences or billboards, can be targeted to the
```

    locations generating the largest amount of potential revenue. Similarly, more attention can be
    put toward increasing outreach in locations where existing marketing campaigns are less
    effective.

Export reports
==============

To set measures of the report, begin by navigating to the :icon:`oi-view-pivot`
:guilabel:`(pivot view)`. Click the :guilabel:`Measures` button to view the available measures of

> the report. Select the desired measures, and verify the measures, filters, and groups are all
> displayed correctly in the pivot table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the report. Select the desired measures from the drop-down menu (multiple measures can be selected), and verify the measures, filters, and groups are all displayed correctly in the pivot table.
```

> Next, click on the :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(settings)` button to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, click on the :guilabel:`Actions` :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(gear)` icon, located to
```

> the right of :guilabel:`Lead Analysis` in the top-left of the page to view the available export

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the right of :guilabel:`Lead Analysis` in the top-left of the page, to view the available export
```

options.

To export the report in the Odoo *Documents* app, navigate to :menuselection:`Settings app -->

> Spreadsheet --> Insert list in spreadsheet`. A menu will appear with export options.

Reviewer: Does the user *have to* leave the CRM app (and report they just built) to do this? Or, can they simply click the 'Insert in Spreadsheet' button? Also, in the previous paragraph, you instructed the reader to open the Actions (gear) menu...but then didn't break down their options on that menu, nor did you provide information about what they should select... I think it might benefit the overall doc if some added clarification and elaboration was placed in that portion...just to round things out, so to speak...

Reviewer: I'm also not seeing a clickable header menu option, feature, or section on the Settings app with the name: Spreadsheet.

Reviewer: Perhaps, instead of "Settings app..." you meant to say "Settings icon" (which I have changed to the 'Actions' (gear) above)
In that case, a potential rewording of this section could be...

From the resulting :guilabel:`Actions` :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(gear) drop-down menu, select :menuselection:`Spreadsheet --> Link menu in spreadsheet'.

Was that what you intended here? If not, just let me know. But, that's what I'm seeing on the runbot I am using for this review.

![Screenshot 2024-07-15 093623](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2304e4ec-b037-49ae-8429-b1bea43c86af)

Reviewer: UPDATE: I think I see where the "disconnect" happened here...

So, at the top of this section, you instruct the reader to enter Pivot view, and make some customizations. 

Then, you tell them to open the Actions (gear) drop-down menu, but don't tell them why/what to select...

After that, you (I believe mistakenly) instruct them to go to the Settings app, but I don't think that's necessary, as the 'Insert in Spreadsheet' options are available directly from the reporting page.

Following that, you have different results and options via the Spreadsheet directions, and I think that's because the directions you have provided here, are for things in a List view (*not* Pivot view, which you have just told the reader to enter). That's why your instructions/options are different.

When in list view, the "Name of the list..." field and "Insert the first ______ records" field appears on the pop-up...that does not occur when in Pivot...

So, during your revisions, give this section another read-through/run-through, and make the necessary adjustments to ensure that everything lines and works as intended. Thanks! 👍

> The report can be named using the `Name of the list` field. The number of items on the report can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The report can be named using the `Name of the link` field. The number of items on the report can be
```
If my suggestions aren't lining up with your intentions, just let me know. But this is what I'm seeing during my run-through...

![Screenshot 2024-07-15 094056](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3c8bd094-e165-4220-aa5d-89fc899635af)

set with the field labeled: `Insert the first _ records of the list`. Next, select either a new

> blank spreadsheet, or export into an existing spreadsheet Finally, click the :guilabel:`Confirm`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:guilabel:`Blank spreadsheet`, or export into an existing spreadsheet Finally, click the :guilabel:`Confirm`
```

button.

.. image:: marketing_attribution/documents-export.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Set the name, number of records, and location of the export in the option menu.

> To export the report as a \*.xlsx file for use in an external spreadsheets program, navigate to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To export the report as a .xlsx file, for use in an external spreadsheets program, click the
```

> :menuselection:`Settings app` and click the :icon:`fa-upload` :guilabel:`(Export All)` button. If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:guilabel:`Actions` :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(gear) icon, and select the :icon:`fa-upload` :guilabel:`Export All` option. If
```

> prompted, choose a file location and a name for the file, then click :guilabel:`Save`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prompted, choose a file location, name the file, then click :guilabel:`Save`.
```

grouping set by the *Group By* parameters.

.. image:: marketing_attribution/list-view-button.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Click the button with four horizontal lines on the top right of the Leads Analysis page.

Add UTM parameters
==================

*Urchin Tracking Modules (UTMs)* are snippets of text embedded in URLs that are used to track
visitor data. This includes parameters relating to how a visitor reached the link, such as the type
of website visited, and/or marketing campaign the visit came from.

Odoo can use these UTMs as parameters in the marketing attribution report to track the metrics and
performance of marketing campaigns.

Create UTMs
-----------

The :doc:`link tracker <../../../websites/website/reporting/link_tracker>` in Odoo can be used to
create and configure UTMs.

UTMs can also be automatically generated by the :doc:`Email Marketing
<../../../marketing/email_marketing>` and :doc:`Marketing Automation
<../../../marketing/marketing_automation>` apps.

The UTM parameters used in a marketing attribution report are *Medium*, *Source*, and *Campaign*, in
descending order of coverage.

- *Medium* is the UTM with the widest coverage, such as social media.

> - *Source* is more narrow, and covers parameters such as the specific social media platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Source* is more narrow, and covers parameters, such as the specific social media platform.
```

> - *Campaign* is the most narrow and can track specific marketing campaigns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Campaign* is the most narrow, and can track specific marketing campaigns.
```

    is selected first. For example, selecting :guilabel:`Medium`, followed by :guilabel:`Source`,
    and then :guilabel:`Campaign`, in :guilabel:`Group By` column, sorts all results *first* by
    medium, *then* by the specific sources in each medium, followed by the campaigns in each source.

    This can be verified by looking at the direction, and order, of the selections in the group tile
    that appears in the :guilabel:`Search...` bar.

    .. image:: marketing_attribution/group-by.png
       :align: center
       :alt: The text in the tile is `Country > City`, showing that city is a subgroup of country.

.. example::
    For a useful first report:

    #. From the :guilabel:`Filters` column, select the :guilabel:`Active` filter to view only leads
    that are still marked as active.
    #. From the :guilabel:`Group By` column, select (in this specific order) :guilabel:`Source`,
    followed by the :guilabel:`City` or :guilabel:`Country`, depending on which grouping is more
    relevant.

    .. image:: marketing_attribution/campaign-and-country-groups.png
       :align: center
       :alt: Each lead is now sorted by source, followed by city or country.

>     This report contains all active leads, grouped first by the source of the lead, then the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This report contains all active leads, grouped first by the source of the lead, then by the
```

    city or country each lead is from. This is useful to see the density of active opportunities
    sorted by location.

>     With this data, marketing campaigns, such as conferences or billboards can be targeted to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    With this data, marketing campaigns, such as conferences or billboards, can be targeted to the
```

    locations generating the largest amount of potential revenue. Similarly, more attention can be
    put toward increasing outreach in locations where existing marketing campaigns are less
    effective.

Export reports
==============

To set the measures of the report, begin by navigating to the :icon:`oi-view-pivot`

> :guilabel:`(pivot view)`. Click the :guilabel:`Measures` button to view the available measures of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:guilabel:`(pivot view)` on the :guilabel:`Leads Analysis` dashboard.

Click the :guilabel:`Measures` button to view the available measures of
```

the report. Select the desired measures from the drop-down menu (multiple measures can be selected),
and verify the measures, filters, and groups are all displayed correctly in the pivot table. This
ensures the data is ready for export.

> To quickly export the list as a .xlsx file, navigate to the :icon:`oi-view-list` :guilabel:`(list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To quickly export the data in a list, as a .xlsx file, navigate to the :icon:`oi-view-list` :guilabel:`(list
```

Reviewer: kept going back-and-forth between "an .xlsx file" and "a .xlsx file" -- it all depends on if the reader reads it as "dot-xlsx" or just "xlsx" -- totally your call. Just figured it was worth mentioning...

view)`. Click on the :guilabel:`Actions` :icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(gear)` icon, located to the
right of :guilabel:`Lead Analysis` in the top-left of the page, and click :icon:`fa-upload`
:guilabel:`Export All`. The report downloads automatically as a .xlsx file.

> For more export options, the report can be exported in the Odoo *Documents* app. From the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more export options, the report can be exported to the Odoo *Documents* app. From the
```
is this correct? the original wording implies (at least to me) that I'd have to navigate/open the Documents app to complete this...

> :icon:`oi-view-list` :guilabel:`(list view)`, begin by clicking the :guilabel:`Actions`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:icon:`oi-view-list` :guilabel:`(list view)` of :guilabel:`Leads Analysis` page, begin by clicking the :guilabel:`Actions`
```

:icon:`fa-cog` :guilabel:`(gear)` icon again. Now, navigate to :icon:`fa-table`

> :guilabel:`Spreadsheet` and click :icon:`oi-view-list` :guilabel:`Insert list in spreadsheet`. A
> pop-up window titled :guilabel:`Select a spreadsheet to insert your list.` appears.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:guilabel:`Spreadsheet`, and click :icon:`oi-view-list` :guilabel:`Insert list in spreadsheet`. A
pop-up window titled, :guilabel:`Select a spreadsheet to insert your list.` appears.
```

> The report can be named using the `Name of the list` field. The number of items on the report can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The report can be renamed using the `Name of the list` field, if desired. The number of items on the report can be
```

set with the field labeled: `Insert the first _ records of the list`. Next, select either a new

> :guilabel:`Blank spreadsheet`, or export into an existing spreadsheet Finally, click the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:guilabel:`Blank spreadsheet`, or export into an existing spreadsheet. Finally, click the
```

   :align: center
   :alt: Click the button with four horizontal lines on the top right of the Leads Analysis page.

Add UTM parameters
==================

*Urchin Tracking Modules (UTMs)* are snippets of text embedded in URLs that are used to track
visitor data. This includes parameters relating to how a visitor reached the link, such as the type
of website visited, and/or marketing campaign the visit came from.

Odoo can use these UTMs as parameters in the marketing attribution report to track the metrics and
performance of marketing campaigns.

Create UTMs
-----------

The :doc:`link tracker <../../../websites/website/reporting/link_tracker>` in Odoo can be used to
create and configure UTMs.

UTMs can also be automatically generated by the :doc:`Email Marketing
<../../../marketing/email_marketing>` and :doc:`Marketing Automation
<../../../marketing/marketing_automation>` apps.

The UTM parameters used in a marketing attribution report are *Medium*, *Source*, and *Campaign*, in
descending order of coverage.

- *Medium* is the UTM with the widest coverage, such as social media.
- *Source* is more narrow, and covers parameters, such as the specific social media platform.

> - *Campaign* is the most narrow, and can track specific marketing campaigns.

Reviewer 2: Define these more; these parameters mean very specific things.
